KBI0017: delete commits and their annexed data (#69)
psychoinformatics-de/knowledge-base: kbi/0017/index.rst

.. index::
   single: <topic>; <subtopic>

KBI0017: How to delete commits including their annexed data
===========================================================

:authors: Christian Mönch <christian.moench@web.de>

> :discussion: <link>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:discussion: https://github.com/psychoinformatics-de/knowledge-base/pull/69
```

:keywords: delete commits, delete annexed data
:software-versions: datalad_0.8.13, git-annex_10.20230407

This knowledge base item describes how to delete commits and
the annexed data that was added to the annex when the commits
were created.

The initial state and the goal
------------------------------

There is a datalad dataset with an annex and a number of commits.
Some of those commits added files to the annex, and some might
just have added files to git. We assume that the last commit has
added a number of files to the annex. The dataset has not yet been
pushed to a sibling.

The goal is to remove the last commit and all annexed files that

> were added when the commit was performed.

Reviewer: I think the specific case from the user was actually not the last commit, but some commit before. Of course, the outlined process would not differ if it were the last commit or the 5th commit or whichever one, but I think the important distinction for the user was that they couldn't just use `git reset --hard` to a commit N, because that would remove all other commits that were made after N. That's why the `git rebase` was suggested in their case.

Whether or not, the example used in this KBI sticks with the last commit or uses an Nth commit, I think the point about `rebase` vs `reset` is worth making.

Principal strategy
------------------

To remove a commit and all annexed files, two phases have to be
executed. First, the commit itself has to be removed. Second, the
annexed files that were added in the commit, and moved into the
annex object store have to be removed.

There are a few ways to delete commits from git. We propose to

> use an interactive `git rebase`. Let's assume the git-log looks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
use an interactive `git rebase`_. Let's assume the git-log looks
```

like this:

.. code-block:: bash

    255c4fd (HEAD -> master) add two more files
    9bb8847 add two initial files
    2dd6618 [DATALAD] new dataset

To remove the last commit, first execute a rebase onto the
hash that preceeds the last commit, i.e. ``9bb8847``. To do
that execute the command:

.. code-block:: bash

    git rebase -i 9bb8847

During the interactive rebase drop commit ``255c4fd``.
(It is possible to drop multiple commits in a single interactive
git rebase by choosing another commit as a rebase target.)

Now the links to the annexed content are removed. In order

> to remove the annex content itself, execute the command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to remove the annex content itself, execute the command `git annex unused`_:
```

.. code-block:: bash

    git annex unused

> That will display a number of annexed files that are now
> unused. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That will display a number of annexed files that are not
referenced anymore from git. For example:
```

.. code-block:: bash

    unused . (checking for unused data...) (checking master...)
      Some annexed data is no longer used by any files:
        NUMBER  KEY
        1       MD5E-s9--c31ea01ca12b5558b6503a8143cdb98c.txt
        2       MD5E-s11--1d6f4be608158f767aafd1bab92043a7.txt

> The unused files can now be dropped with the command ``git annex
> dropunused``:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The unused files can now be dropped with the command `git annex dropunused`_:
```

.. code-block:: bash

    > git annex dropunused 1
    > git annex dropunused 2

> 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

.. _git rebase: https://git-scm.com/docs/git-rebase
.. _git annex unused: https://git-annex.branchable.com/git-annex-unused/
.. _git annex dropunused: https://git-annex.branchable.com/git-annex-dropunused/

```

Words of warning
----------------

> Not every presently "unused" key might be from a delete commit. There might be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Not every presently "unused" key (i.e. unreferenced data file) might be
from the deleted commit. There might be
```
